Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today I want to
introduce a very important function that plays
a key role in rational trigonometry in the plane
but also in setting up projective geometry even
in one dimension it's a very lovely formula and
I hope that you will like it ok so to introduce
it let me remind you that we had a triple quad
formula in the one-dimensional situation we were
just talking about points on a line the affine
one-dimensional line with points just given by
single numbers the quadrants between two such
a fine one points just the difference between
the coordinates squared making it symmetric and
algebraic so this is some kind of measure of the
non identity of the two points if the two points
are equal then this equals zero and the difference
is how you tell whether something is zero or not
and the fundamental formula in this subject is
a triple quad formula which tells you what the
relationship is between the three quadrants is
that you get by looking at three affine 1 points
the relationship is Q 1 plus Q 2 plus Q 3 squared
equals 2 times Q 1 square plus Q 2 squared
plus Q 3 squared an asymmetric form which is
a little bit shorter to write is at Q 1 plus Q
2 minus Q 3 squared equals 4 Q 1 Q 2 and we saw
this formula sort of appearing in many different
manifestations as we went further along in our
study of affine geometry and metrical structure
ok we're going to find a similar kind of thing
happening in the projective setting but we need a
replacement for this formula that's valid in the
projective setting so let's begin by setting
a stage and saying what the geometry is that
we're considering so we're going to be looking
at one dimensional Euclidean projective geometry
that means we're looking at the projective line
and we're adding to it a notion of quadrants
we call it a projective quads to distinguish it
from the 1 dimensional Euclidean affine quadrants
that we've just been talking about and here's the
definition of what that concept is going to be we
have two projective one points a 1 and a 2 they're
given in terms of coordinates a 1 is x1 to y1 this
is a proportion and a 2 is X - 2 y2 and we're
visualizing these 2 projective 1 points as lines
in the two-dimensional plane we don't have to do
that but that's a very nice visual way so there
is the projective 1 point whose name is 3 2 1 and
there's though protected 1 point whose coordinates
are 1 2 2 right so what are we going to do we
want to assign to 2 such lines a number that is
some kind of reflection of how far away they are
from being equal so equality is a good place to
start asking ourselves when are these two things
equal well they're equal when the proportions are
equal in other words when x1 y2 minus x2 y1
equals 0 that quantity exactly captures when
the two things are equal so a natural thing that
you might think of is why don't we just define the
quadrants to be what I just said and we'll square
it so that it's symmetric that would be exactly
the same kind of thing as we did in the affine
case we took the difference and then we squared
it to make it symmetric so why don't we do that
that'd be the most natural thing to do we don't
do that because it's not well-defined because if
you multiply this proportion say by 5 multiplied
x1 and y1 by 5 then the proportion itself doesn't
change but this quantity will change it'll change
by a factor of 5 squared so we need to adjust
for the fact that if we scale x1 and y1 that
this thing multiplies by the square of that factor
we need to compensate by having something in the
denominator that will essentially cancel any such
scaling term and here's what we're gonna do we're
going to take X 1 squared plus y 1 squared and
multiply it by X 2 squared plus y 2 squared so
both of these are quadratic in the coefficients
so if we multiply X 1 and y 1 both by 5 then the
numerator will multiply by 5 squared because of
this term the denominator will also multiply by
5 squared so the whole thing is unchanged so you
can think about these two factors down here as
being sort of normalizations that just ensure
that this quantity is unchanged under scaling
and you may remember from our discussion in
the affine case that this thing here has the
form of a determinant and it's really the area
of a parallelogram squared that we're talking
about or the quad really grabbed up to a scalar
so it's really like a normalized quadri of the
parallelogram but we're actually thinking about
starting just in the one-dimensional situation
here so for example if a 1 is 3 1 and a 2 is 1
2 then how do we determine the quadrants between
these two points we take 3 times 2 minus 1 times
1 that's 5 and we square it now we divide by the
sum of the squares here which is 9 plus 1 or
10 and multiplied by the sum of the squares
here which is 1 plus 4 or 5 so it's 5 squared
divided by 10 times 5 which turns out to be 1/2
that's a rather special projective quadrants in
the plain here that turns out to be essentially
equivalent to having an angle of 45 degrees or PI
by 4 if you if you want to use that system this
is a completely rational kind of approach
to the separation of lines and we're just
applying it now to this one-dimensional setting
where we're only talking about lines through
the origin in this one-dimensional projective
setting so here's a fundamental definition of
the projective quadrants between two projec of one
points the definition of the projective quadrants
is closely associated to an important identity
that goes back seven or eight hundred years to
Fibonacci or Leonardo of Pisa in fact arguably
it's perhaps even traceable to Diophantus who
lived a few hundred years after christ here's the
idea T X 1 X 2 plus y 1 y 2 squared plus X 1 Y 2
minus X 2 y 1 squared equals x 1 squared plus y
1 squared times X 2 squared plus y 2 squared so
if you haven't seen this identity before please
check it for yourselves by expanding both sides
and seeing that they simplify to the same thing
okay so this identity allows us to rewrite our
formula for the projective quadrants so here's
our original formula that the quadrants between
the projective point x1 to y1 and x2 to y2 is
given by this expression we recognize that as
this term divided by the right-hand side so using
this formula we can rewrite that as 1 minus this
term divided by the right-hand side because
if you divide everything by the right-hand
side then this over that right-hand side plus
this over that right-hand side equals 1 and
this is a very nice alternate way of thinking
about this projective quadrants fact we could
have also defined it this way that connects
to what's called the dot product or standard
Euclidean inner product that's familiar to most
students who have taken a linear algebra course
so for example suppose we have this situation
here where we have one line which is 3 to 2
passing through the point 3 comma 2 and this
line here line 1 to 4 passing through this
point 1 comma 4 then this thing here would be 1
times 3 plus 4 times 2 that's 11 so there being
11 squared here and then the sum of the squares
here would be a 17 sum of the squares here would
be 13 so another form for the quadrants between
these two projected one points would be 1 minus
11 squared over 13 times 17 now when we write it
this way then the student of linear algebra says
aha wait a minute I've seen this expression before
if we take a square root of this expression take a
square root in quotes as usual then the student
would recognize this is the cosine of the angle
that's formed between the two lines say theta okay
so this is actually problematic to say exactly
what's going on here in this context because
angles are in fact quite delicate things to define
correctly and they require infinite processes and
also these circular or transcendental functions
sine and cosine also require infinite processes
so they're also dubious okay but if we play along
with the standard game then we see that this is
the standard expression 1 minus cos square root
of the angle that's what it has to be same as sine
squared of the angle so this is a good way to sort
of ground you if you are based on the standard
classical training you can think about what the
projective quadrants is between these two lines as
just the square of the sine of the angle between
them in fact there's more than one angle between
them because there's that angle but there's also
this angle or there's this angle there's a whole
host of angles there fortunately they all have the
same square of their sine the angles are different
but you take their signs and square them then no
longer matters which direction you're going you're
always going to get that same number which is this
projective quadrants the projective quadrants is a
purely algebraic thing that you can work out just
with a pencil or maybe in your head like we did
here there's no infinite series required there's
no calculus notions to define angles so this
is very much more Elementary sort of ultimately
more fundamental kind of number to associate
to to projective one points or lines through
the origin in our two-dimensional space if you
prefer okay so it's very important to keep both
of these ways of thinking about the projective
quadrants of mind so since this is a departure
from the way students would normally think it's
important to stress that there is a good reason
why we don't use the angle theta to measure
the separation of the two projective points
a 1 a 2 although yes we can think about them
as being lines to the origin and classically
there's an angle in fact the actual existence of
this angle is highly problematic and you can see
that in terms of the standard sort of derivation
of the angle from the dot product all right so
the dot product here divided by the length of v1
the length of v2 that's the standard thing that
one does no one takes a coasts inverse of that in
order to find an angle ok so students these days
including students at UNSW are taught how to go
through these motions and invariably there's a lot
of pressing buttons on calculators because that's
ultimately really all what you can do to actually
make progress in evaluating something like this
you have to go to floating point you have to give
up the dream of all those infinite miles and miles
of decimals out there and just concentrate on the
first 10 digits or whatever ok it's all you can
do so there are square roots here and you want to
evaluate them infinite processes and then there's
this rather complicated arc cosine or cos inverse
function which is yet another infinite process
which we'll talk about at some later stage but
the point is that in reality to actually evaluate
these things correctly that is that completely
accurately is essentially completely futile it's
impossible ok so it doesn't really work from a
pure mathematics point of view even though one
can make calculations but it turns out that one
can make much better calculations by trying to
get rid of all these transcendental irrational
quantities as you're slowly I hope starting to
appreciate alright so there's a there's close
connection to the modern approach but we're trying
to steer away from all that real number nonsense
and that guides us in the right direction
because we know we can't take square roots
we know we can't do infinite processes so we're
not gonna go down that road we're going to find
a better road this projective quadrants that
we've introduced into this projective setting
allows us to define a notion of perpendicularity
between projective one points how does that go
well if a 1 is x 1 to y 1 and a 2 is X 2 to y
2 we have two projective one points we say that
these two points are perpendicular and we write
that perpendicularity like this precisely when
the quadrants between them is equal to 1 quadrants
equals 1 is our notion of perpendicularity of our
two projective 1 points and from this alternate
form of the projective quadrants we can see that
this condition of the quadrants being 1 is exactly
the condition that this numerator here be 0 and
that does very directly connect with notions
of perpendicularity in the plane in the affine
plane with the euclidean structure so this is the
standard way of defining perpendicularity of two
vectors in the plane using linear algebra so for
example the point 3 2 4 is perpendicular to the
point minus 8 2 6 and that's because 3 times minus
8 plus 4 times 6 is 0 1 2 0 is perpendicular to 0
2 1 those are our lines through the axes if you
like so we can also have fractions involved so
2/3 to 1/5 is perpendicular to minus 3/10 because
if you multiply these two you get minus 2 and then
you multiply these two you get plus 2 and you
add them up you get 0 so perpendicularity has
a very nice interpretation purely in terms of the
projective quadrants we don't really need to know
anything about dot products okay it's just we
have two proportions we have this definition of
the projective quadrants and perpendicularity
comes from that so let's make note of a few
simple facts about our projective quadrants
it's symmetric the quadrants between a 1 a 2
is the same as the quadrants between a 2 and a
1 there's a sort of an identity rule that the
quadrants is 0 precisely when the points are equal
the original definition had an X 1 Y 2 minus X 2
y 1 in the numerator and so the quadrants will
be 0 precisely when that numerator is 0 which
is exactly the condition that those two ratios
are two proportions are the same ok that's the
basic condition there this is the condition of
equality of these two proportions and the third
observation is that the projective quadrants
is always between 0 & 1 these sort of extreme
points of being equal and being perpendicular
and this follows from the two different forms
we had of the projective quadrants so here's
two points and here's the original definition
and then here is our alternate definition obtained
from the Fibonacci identity from here we can see
that the quantity is always positive because
everything here is positive and from here we
can see that it's always going to be less than or
equal to 1 because it's 1 minus something which
is completely positive when I say positive I mean
greater than or equal to 0 all right so both forms
tell us that this projective quadrant is always
between 0 & 1 and pleasantly it's zero when the
two projective points are equal and it's 1 when
the two projective points are perpendicular so now
we come to the same key question that we started
off discussing in the affine one-dimensional case
after we defined quadrants between two points
the next simple situation was what happens if
we have three points in that case we had three
different quadrants a''s and there was some
relationship between them and figuring out that
relationship was sort of the key starting point
for a whole bunch of new developments exactly the
same situation happens here we've just defined the
notion of projective quadrants between two of
our projective 1 points okay now what happens
if we have three projective points for example a
1 a 2 a 3 then there are going to be 3 projective
quadrants --is Q 1 say it's the quadrants between
a 2 and a 3 Q 2 the quadrants between a 1 and a
3 and Q 3 of the quadrants between a 1 and
a 2 and so we ask what is the relationship
between these three numbers for example in this
situation here we have a 1 is 2 2 1 a 2 is 1 2 3
and a 3 is minus 1 2 1 let you check that the
projective coordinates between these 2 is 1/2
between these two is 4/5 and between these two
is 9/10 so we want to know what's the general
relationship that's going to hold between these
3 numbers no matter which lines we choose so
there is such a relationship and it's a very
important formula in fact it's one of the top
10 formulas in mathematics in my opinion and I'm
not exaggerating I really do think it's one of the
top 10 formulas in mathematics and probably by the
end of this series you will probably agree with me
all right you will see how this formula opens up
all kinds of new areas and new developments and
quite a variety of different things it's really
remarkable and beautiful formula ok so a major
exercise for you now ok at the end of this slide
please stop the video do not go to the next slide
you have now this fabulous project to do to find
this relation to find the polynomial relation
between q1 q2 and q3 it's a great exercise
even if you're a professional mathematician
it's quite a little bit more tricky or subtle
than that one-dimensional a fine situation was
was probably pretty easy this one is a little
bit more tricky and it's very satisfying and you
end up with a beautiful relation so you can own
this relationship for yourself by discovering it
okay if you have done the exercise let's see if
your answer is the same as this one here it is the
projective triple quad formula three projective
one points the three projective quadrants a--'s
and here is the relationship between them Q 1 plus
Q 2 plus Q 3 squared equals 2 times Q 1 squared
plus Q 2 squared plus Q 3 squared plus 4 times
the product q1 times q2 times Q 3 it's exactly
the same as the triple quad formula which is there
together with this additional cubic term so it's
no longer of degree 2 as it was in the affine
case its degree 3 because that's a cubic ok as
an exercise here's an alternate a symmetric form
which is Q 1 plus Q 2 minus Q 3 squared equals 4
Q 1 times Q 2 times 1 minus Q 3 if we eliminated
this factor here then we would get the familiar
asymmetric form of the triple quad formula so
this is not so much different from the affine
story again we can generally expect this that the
projective story is somehow sort of following the
affine one but it's a little bit more complicated
it's a little bit richer maybe it's a little bit
more interesting ultimately all right so those
of you who have studied rational trigonometry and
good on you for doing that you will recognize the
formula in rational trigonometry the same formula
occurs it's very important formula there it's
one of the main five formulas and it's called
the triple spread formula and we'll talk more
about that manifestation of it later on that's
really a sort of 2-dimensional manifestation of
the same formula here we're really interested
in identifying it as a one-dimensional phenomena
though somehow more elementary in way than this
two-dimensional appearance in regular rational
trigonometry it's useful when talking about the
formula to introduce this function called the
triple spread function that's denoted by capital
S so s of ABC is a plus B plus C squared minus two
a squared plus B squared plus C squared minus four
ABC that's what you get when you bring everything
on one side of this triple quad formula in the
projective setting so that allows us for example
to write efficiently that s of four-fifths one
half nine tenths equals zero this is an efficient
way of saying that these three numbers satisfy the
projective triple quad formula okay now here's a
little bit of an exercise for you just to come a
little bit more familiar with this particular
form maybe start to appreciate it so the the
spread function on ABC is the same as Archimedes
function a B's C minus product for eight times B
times C and here's another expression so sort of
writing it out a little bit differently and here's
another expression which is quite different well
worth having a look at that four times one minus
a times one minus B times one minus C minus a
plus B plus C minus 2 all squared and one more
as the negative of a four by four determinant if
you don't know what a four by four determine it is
don't worry if you do happen to know what that
is then you can check that that's the same has
Pleasant symmetric form here ABC here ABC here and
ones ones with a two down in that corner and this
exercise take it from my book exercise 7.1 all
right so we're gonna see this result play a major
role clearly what we have to do is now explain
why it's true okay and that's a good thing for
you to think about too so between now and next
lecture why do you think about how to prove
this thing maybe you can prove it yourselves and
we'll also see that the Euclidean structure that
we're imposing on the projective line by talking
about this projective quadrants has interesting
ramification algebraically there's actually an
algebraic structure on this projective line which
is probably quite familiar to you once you see it
written down it's actually a very elementary kind
of one-dimensional algebraic structure which is
still non-trivial and quite interesting so lots
more extensions from this we're just entering
this brave new projective world and it's a very
interesting world so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening